# Changes to _Sets, Logic, Computation_

## Fall 2025 

- Maintenance release. Many small corrections, additional exercises.

## Fall 2021

- The part on first-order logic has long needed an introductory chapter that motivates why we need all the technical details on syntax and semantics. The syntax and semantics chapter has grown overly long and the details are daunting. So there is now a new chapter with an overview of the part on first-order logic, and the syntax and semantics chapter has been split into two. This results in renumbering of some chapters in the textbooks (Chapters 5, 6, 7 in Sets, Logic, Computation).
- The definition of satisfaction only made use of variable assignments and x-variants; this made it hard to see how the definitions say “for some domain element” and “for all domain elements”. We’ve introduced the notation s[m/x] as the assignment just like s, except assigning m to x. See the discussion here and Section 7.4 in SLC.
- Previously, the output of a Turing machine was taken to be whatever the longest non-blank block of symbols on the tape is after it halts. In particular, it was not required that a TM leaves its input at the beginning of the tape. That makes it difficult to chain together Turing machines: after the first machine halts, it must be possible to find its output. So the definition of output now is: the sequence of symbols between square 1 and the last non-blank symbol (Definition 14.10 in SLC). There now is also a definition of a “disciplined” Turing machine which halts on square 1 and also leaves the tape-end marker alone. Concatenations of disciplined machines is now safely defined (Section 14.8 of SLC).
- The discussion of how Turing machines can be enumerated, and how their descriptions can be represented on the tape of another Turing machine were defective in that they required that the symbols of the described machine are all part of the symbol set of the machine dealing with the description. This makes it impossible to have a universal machine. Instead, we must standardize the vocabulary (and states), e.g., by assigning numbers to symbols and states, and then using unary representation for these numbers. This has been fixed (see Section 15.2 of SLC). Since it’s now possible to talk about the tape representations of arbitrary machines, we now have a section on universal Turing machines too (Section 15.3 of SLC).
- The representation of Turing machines as first-order sentences (Section 15.6 in SLC) in the proof of the unsolvability of the decision problem unnecessarily required that the successor function is injective. This forced all models of T(M,w) to be infinite, even if M halts on w. This has been fixed. Since it’s now relatively easy to expand the proof to Trakhtenbrot’s theorem, this has been added (Section 15.9 in SLC).
- The discussion of inverse function has been improved (Section 3.4 of SLC)

## Fall 2019

- I’ve revised the completeness theorem thoroughly. (This was issue 38.) The main change is that instead of constructing a maximally consistent set, we construct a complete and consistent set. Of course, those are extensionally the same; but both the reason for why we need them and the way we construct them is directly related to completeness and only indirectly to maximal consistency: We want a set that contains exactly one of A or ¬A for every sentence so we can define a term model and prove the truth lemma. And we construct that set by systematically adding either A or ¬A (whichever one is consistent) to the original set. So it makes pedagogical sense to say that’s what we’re doing rather than confuse students with the notion of maximal consistency, prove that the Lindenbaum construction yields a maximally consistent set, and show that maximally consistent sets are complete so we can define the term model from it. Credit for the idea goes to Greg Restall, who does this in his course on Advanced Logic.  (I kind of wonder why standard textbooks mention maximally consistent sets. I’m guessing it’s because if you consider uncountable languages you have to use Zorn’s lemma to prove Lindenbaum’s theorem, and then using maximality is more natural. Is that right?) A bonus effect of this change is that a direct proof of the compactness theorem is now a tedious but relatively easy adaptation of the completeness proof; and I’ve added a section on this (leaving most of the details as exercises).
-  I’ve revised the soundness proofs for sequent calculus and natural deduction, where the individual cases are now more clearly discussed. (This was issue 74 and issue 125.)
- In the process I also simplified a bunch of things, filled in some details, and corrected some errors. This includes fixing issue 110, and cleaning up the whole stuff about extensionality. There is a new section on assignments which you may need to add to your driver file unless you include fol/syn/syntax-and-semantics.tex in its entirety.
- The natural deduction system now uses Prawitz’s standard rules, i.e., the double negation elimination rule has been replaced with the classical absurdity rule, and the negation rules are now the special cases of the conditional rules with ⊥ as consequent. This was issue 144. Comparing the system to other treatments in the literature is now easier, and the chapter will integrate more seamlessly with the part on intuitionistic logic that’s in the works.
- The sequent calculus chapter now uses sequents that are made up of sequences, not sets, of formulas. This was issue 145. This is the standard way of doing it, and will make it easier to add material on substructural logics. It also makes the soundness proof a lot easier to understand.
- In both the sequent calculus and natural deduction chapters, the material on quantifiers is now separated from that on propositional connectives. Eventually it should be possible to present propositional logic separately (or only), and now you can reuse only the material on propositional logic. (This was issue 77.)
- There is a new chapter on proof systems, and the intro sections from both the natural deduction and sequent calculus chapters have moved there. So if you only want one of the proof systems, you’ll have to include the relevant intro section in the chapter on the proof system “by hand.” But if you include both, you now have an additional chapter that introduces and compares them.  (This was issue 61.)
- Sets, Logic, Computation (the textbook for Logic II) now includes both sequent calculus and natural deduction!

## Fall 2016

- First release